# Introduction

Embedded Android
Karim Yaghmour
Beijing • Cambridge • Farnham • Köln • Sebastopol • Tokyo

Embedded Android
by Karim Yaghmour
Revision History for the :
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781449308292 for release details.
ISBN: 978-1-449-30829-2

Table of Contents
Preface ..................................................................... vii
1. Introduction ........................................................... 1
Differences With "Classic" Open Source Projects 5
Feature Inclusion, Roadmaps, and New Releases 6
Getting "Android" 8
Google's Own Android Apps 13
2. Internals Primer ....................................................... 21
App Developer's View 21
iii

Anonymous Shared Memory (ashmem) 33
Android's General Approach 39
Native User-Space 43
Command-Line Utilities 50
Dalvik and Android's Java 50
Java Native Interface (JNI) 52
A Service Example: the Activity Manager 57
3. AOSP Jumpstart ....................................................... 63
4. The Build System ...................................................... 85
envsetup.sh 91
iv | Table of Contents

Table of Contents | v

Preface
Android's growth is phenomenal. In a very short time-span, it has succeeded in be-
coming one of the top mobile platforms in the market. Clearly, the unique combination
of open source licensing, aggressive go-to-market, and trendy interface is bearing fruit
for Google's Android team. Needless to say, the massive user uptake generated by An-
droid has not gone unnoticed for handset manufacturers, mobile network operators,
silicon manufacturers, and app developers. Products, apps and devices "for," "com-
patible with," or "based on" Android seem to be coming out ever so fast.
Beyond its mobile success, however, Android is also attracting the attention of yet
another, unintended crowd: embedded systems developers. While a large number of
embedded devices have little to no human interface, a substantial number of devices
which would traditionally be considered "embedded" do have user interfaces. For a
goodly number of modern machines, in addition to pure technical functionality, de-
velopers creating user-facing devices must also contend with human-computer inter-
action (HCI) factors. Therefore, designers must either present users with an experience
they are already familiar with or risk alienating users by requiring them to learn a lesser
known or entirely new user experience. Before Android, the user interface choices
available to the developers of such devices were fairly limited and limiting.
Clearly, embedded developers prefer offering users an interface they are already familiar
with. Although that interface might have been window-based in the past—and hence
a lot of embedded devices were based on classic window-centric, desktop-like or desk-
top-based interfaces—Apple's iOS and Google's Android have forever democratized
the use of touch-based iPhone-like graphical interfaces. This shift in user paradgims
and expectations, combined with Android's open source licensing, have created a
ground-swell of interest for Android within the embedded world.
Unlike Android app developers, however, developers wanting to do any sort of platform
work in Android, including porting or adapting Android to an embedded device, rap-
idly run into quite a significant problem: the almost total lack of documentation on
how to do that. So, while Google provides app developers with a considerable amount
of online documentation and while there are a number of books on the topic, such as
O'Reilly's Learning Android, embedded developers have to contend with the minimal-
istic set of documents provided by Google at http://source.android.com. Embedded de-
vii

velopers seriously entertaining the use of Android in their system were essentially re-
duced to starting with Android's source code.
The purpose of this book is to remedy to that situation and enable you to embed An-
droid in any device. You will therefore learn about Android's architecture, how to nav-
igate its source code, how to modify its various components, and how to create your
own version for your particular device. In addition, you will learn how Android inte-
grates into the Linux kernel and how to leverage Android's Linux heritage. For instance,
we will discuss how to take "classic" Linux components such as glibc and BusyBox and
package them as part of Android. Along the way, you will learn day-to-day tips and
tricks, such as how to use Android's repo tool and integrate with or modify Android's
build system.
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Constant width
Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program elements
such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment variables,
statements, and keywords.
Constant width bold
Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic
Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values deter-
mined by context.
This icon signifies a tip, suggestion, or general note.
This icon indicates a warning or caution.
viii | Preface

Using Code Examples
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you may use the code in
this book in your programs and documentation. You do not need to contact us for
permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of the code. For example,
writing a program that uses several chunks of code from this book does not require
permission. Selling or distributing a CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly books does
require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and quoting example
code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant amount of example code
from this book into your product’s documentation does require permission.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually includes the title,
author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Embedded Android by Karim Yaghmour
(O’Reilly). Copyright 2011 Karim Yaghmour, 9781449308292.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given above,
feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.
Safari® Books Online
Safari Books Online is an on-demand digital library that lets you easily
search over 7,500 technology and creative reference books and videos to
find the answers you need quickly.
With a subscription, you can read any page and watch any video from our library online.
Read books on your cell phone and mobile devices. Access new titles before they are
available for print, and get exclusive access to manuscripts in development and post
feedback for the authors. Copy and paste code samples, organize your favorites, down-
load chapters, bookmark key sections, create notes, print out pages, and benefit from
tons of other time-saving features.
O’Reilly Media has uploaded this book to the Safari Books Online service. To have full
digital access to this book and others on similar topics from O’Reilly and other pub-
lishers, sign up for free at http://my.safaribooksonline.com.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
Preface | ix

We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at:
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/9781449308292
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to:
bookquestions@oreilly.com
For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and news, see our website
at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia
x | Preface

Introduction
Putting Android on an embedded device is a complex task involving an intricate un-
derstanding of its internals and a clever mix of modifications to the Android Open
Source Project (AOSP) and the kernel on which it runs, Linux. Before we get into the
details of embedding Android, however, let's start by covering some essential back-
ground that embedded developers should factor in when dealing with Android, such
as Android's hardware requirements and the legal framework surrounding Android and
its implications within an embedded setting. First let's look at where Android comes
from and how it's developed.
History
The story goes* that back in early 2002 Google's Larry Page and Sergey Brin attended
a talk at Stanford about the development of the then-new Sidekick phone by Danger
Inc. The speaker was Andy Rubin, Danger's CEO at the time, and the Sidekick was one
of the first multi-function, Internet-enabled devices. After the talk, Larry went up to
look at the device and was happy to see that Google was the default search engine. Soon
after, both Larry and Sergey became Sidekick users.
Despite its novelty and enthusiatic users, however, the Sidekick didn't achieve com-
mercial success. By 2003, Rubin and Danger's board agreed it was time for him to leave.
After trying out a few things, Rubin decided he wanted to get back into the phone OS
business. Using a domain name he previously-owned, android.com, he set out to create
an open OS for phone manufacturers. After investing most of his savings on the project
and having received some additional seed money, he set out to get the company funded.
Soon after, in August 2005, Google acquired Android Inc. with little fanfare.
* Coinciding with Android's initial announcement in November 2007, the New York Times ran an article
entitled "I, Robot: The Man Behind the Google Phone" by John Markoff giving an insightful background
portrait of Andy Rubin and his career, and, by the same token, providing a lot of insight on the story behind
Android. This section is partly based on that article.

Between its acquisition and its announcement to the world in November 2007, Google
let little to no information out about Android. Instead, the development team worked
furiously on the OS while deals and prototypes were being worked on behind the
scenes. The initial announcement was made by the Open Handset Alliance (OHA), a
group of companies unveiled for the occasion with its stated mission being the devel-
opment of open standards for mobile device and Android being its first product. A year
later, in September 2008, the first open source version of Android, 1.0, was made
available.
Several Android versions have been released since then, and the OS's progression and
development is obviously more public. As we will see later, though, much of the work
on Android continues to be done behind closed doors. Table 1-1 provides a summary
of the various Android releases and the most notable features found in the correspond-
ing AOSP.
Table 1-1. Android Versions
Version Release date Codename Most notable feature(s) Open source
1.0 September 2008 Unknown Yes
1.1 February 2009 Unknown Yes
1.5 April 2009 Cupcake On-screen soft keyboard Yes
1.6 September 2009 Donut Battery usage screen and VPN Yes
support
2.0, 2.0.1, 2.1 October 2009 Eclair Exchange support Yes
2.2 May 2010 Froyo Just-In-Time (JIT) compile Yes
2.3 December 2010 Gingerbread SIP and NFC support Yes
3.0 January 2011 Honeycomb Tablet form-factor support No
3.1 May 2011 Honeycomb USB host support and APIs No
4.0 December 2011 (projected) Ice-Cream Sandwich Merged phone and tablet form- Yes (projected)
factor support
Features and Characteristics
Google advertizes the following features about Android:
Application framework
The application framework used by app developers to create what is commonly-
referred to as Android apps. The use of this framework is documented online at
http://developer.android.com and in books like O'Reilly's Learning Android.
Dalvik Virtual Machine
The clean-room bytecode interpreter implementation used in Android as a re-
placement for the Sun Java VM. While the latter interprets .class and .jar files,
2 | Chapter 1: Introduction

Dalvik interprets .dex files. These files are generated by the dx utility using
the .class files generate by the Java compiler part of the JDK.
Integrated browser
Android includes a WebKit-based browser as part of its standard list of applica-
tions. App developers can use the WebView class to use the WebKit engine within
their own apps.
Optimized graphics
Android provides its own 2D graphics library but relies on OpenGL ES for its 3D
capabilities.
SQLite
This is the standard SQLite database found at http://www.sqlite.org and made
available to app developers through the application framework.
Media support
Android provides support for a wide range of media formats through StageFright,
its custom media framework. Prior to 2.2, Android used to rely on PacketVideo's
OpenCore framework.
GSM telephony support
The telephony support is hardware dependent and device manufacturers must
provide a HAL module in order to enable Android to interface with their hardware.
HAL modules will be discussed in the next chapter.
Bluetooth, EDGE, 3G, and WiFi
Android includes support for most wireless connection technologies. While some
are implemented in Android-specific fashion, such as EDGE and 3G, others are
provided in the same as in plain Linux, as in the case of Bluetooth and WiFi.
Camera, GPS, compass, and accelerometer
Interfacing with the user's environment is key to Android. APIs are made available
in the application framework to access these devices, and some HAL modules are
required to enable their support.
Rich development environment
This is likely one of Android's greatest assets. The development environment avail-
able to developers makes it very easy to get started with Android development. A
full SDK is freely available to download along with an emulator, an Eclipse plugin,
and a number of debugging and profiling tools.
There are of course a lot more features that could be listed for Android, such as USB
support, multitasking, multi-touch, SIP, tethering, voice-activated commands, etc., but
the previous list should give you a good idea of what you'll find in Android. Also note
that every new Android release brings in its own new set of features. Check the Platform
Highlights published with every version for more information on features and enhance-
ments.
Features and Characteristics | 3

In addition to its basic feature-set, the Android platform has a few characteritics that
make it an especially interesting basis for embedded use. Here's a quick summary:
Broad app ecosystem
At the time of this writing there were 200,000 apps in the Android Market. This
compares quite favorably to the Apple App Market's 350,000 apps and ensures
that you have a large pool to choose from should you want to prepackaged appli-
cations with your embedded device.†
Consistent app APIs
All APIs provided in the application framework are meant to be forward-compat-
ible. Hence, custom apps you develop for inclusion in your embedded system
should continue working in future Android versions. In contrast, modifications
you make to Android's source code are not guaranteed to continue applying or
even working in the next Android release.
Replaceable components
Because Android is open source, and as a benefit of its architecture, a lot of its
components can be replaced outright. For instance, if you don't like the default
app Launcher (home screen), you can write your own. More fundamental changes
can also be made to Android. The GStreamer‡ developers, for example, were able
to replace StageFright, the default media framework in Android, with GStreamer
without modifying the app API.
Extendable
Another benefit from Android's openness and its architecture is that adding sup-
port for additional features and hardware is relatively straightforward. You just
need to emulate what the platform is doing for other hardware or features of the
same type. For instance, you can add support for custom hardware to the HAL by
adding a handful of files.
Customizable
If you'd rather use existing components, such as the existing Launcher app, you
can still customize them to your liking. Whether it be tuning their behavior or
changing their look and feel, you are again free to modify the AOSP as needed.
Development Model
When considering whether to use Android, it's crucial that you understand the rami-
fications its development process may have on any modifications you make to it or any
dependencies you may have towards its internals.
†Bare in mind that you likely need to enter into some kind of agreement with an app's publisher before you
can package that app. The app's availability in the Android Market doesn't imply the right for you as a 3rd
party to redistribute it.
‡GStreamer is the default media framework in the Gnome desktop environment.
4 | Chapter 1: Introduction

Differences With "Classic" Open Source Projects
Android's open source nature is one of its most trumpeted features. Indeed, as we've
just seen, many of the software engineering benefits that derive from being open source
apply to Android.
Despite its licensing, however, Android is unlike most open source projects in that its
development is mostly done behind closed doors. The vast majority of open source
projects, for example, have public mailing lists and forums where the main developers
can be found interacting with each other, and public source repositories providing
access to the main development branch's tip. No such thing can be found for Android.
This is best summarized by Andy Rubin himself: “Open source is different than a com-
munity-driven project. Android is light on community-driven, somewhat heavy on
open source.”
Whether we like it or not, Android is mainly developed within Google by the Android
development team and the public is not privy to either internal discussions or the tip
of the development branch. Instead, Google makes code-drops every time a new version
of Android ships on a new device, which is usually every 6 months. For instance, a few
days after the Samsung Nexus S was released in December 2010, the code for the new
version of the Android it was running, 2.3/Gingerbread, was made publicly available
at http://android.git.kernel.org/.
Obviously there is a certain amount of discomfort within the open source community
with the contined use of the term "open source" within the context of project whose
development model contradicts the standard modus operandi typically associated with
open source projects, especially given Android's popularity. The open source com-
munity has not historically been well served by projects that had adopted a similar
development model.
Political issues asside, though, Android's development model means that as a developer
your ability to make contributions to Android is limited. Indeed, unless you become
part of the Android development team at Google, you will not be able to make contri-
butions to the tip of the development branch. Also, save for a handful of exceptions,
you will unlikely be able to discuss your enhancements one-on-one with the core de-
velopment team members. However, you are still free to submit enhancements and
fixes to the AOSP code dumps made available at http://android.git.kernel.org/.
The worst side-effect of Google's approach is that you have absolutely no way to get
inside information about the platform decisions being made by the Android develop-
ment team. If new features are added within the AOSP, for example, or if modifications
are made to core components, you will find out how such changes are made and how
they impact changes you might have made to a previous version only by analyzing the
next code dump. Furthermore, you will have no way to find out the underlying re-
quirement or restriction or issue that justified the modification or inclusion. Had this
Development Model | 5

been a true open source project, a public mailing list archive would exist where all this
information, or pointers to it, would be available.
That being said, it's important to remember how significant a contribution Google is
making by distributing Android under an open source license. Despite its awkward
development model from an open source community perspective, it remains that Goo-
gle's work on Android is a godsend for a large number of developers. Plus, it has ac-
complished one thing no other open source projects was ever able to: create a massively
successful Linux distribution. It would, therefore, be hard to fault Android's develop-
ment team for their work.
Furthermore, it can easily be argued that from a business and go-to-market perspective
a community-driven process would definitely knock the wind out of any product an-
nouncements Google would attempt to release, making it impossible to create "buzz"
around press announcements and the like since every new feature would be developed
in the open. That is to say nothing of the non-deterministic nature of community-driven
processes that can see a group of people take years to agree on the best way to implement
a given feature set. And, simply based on track record, Android's success has definitely
benefited from Google's ability to rapidly move it forward and generate press interest
based on releases of cool new products.
Feature Inclusion, Roadmaps, and New Releases
In brief, there is no publicly available roadmap for features and capabilities in future
Android releases. At best, Google will announce ahead of time the name and approx-
imate release date of the next version. Usually, you can expect a new Android release
to be made in time for the Google I/O conference, which is typically held in May, and
another release by year end. What will be in that release, though, is anyone's guess.
Typically, however, Google will choose a single manufacturer to work with on the next
Android release. During that period, Google will work very closely with that single
manufacturer's engineers to ready up the next Android version to work on a targeted
upcoming flagship device. During that period, the manufacturer's team is reported to
have access to the tip of the development branch. Once the device is put on the market,
the corresponding source code dump is made to the public repositories. For the next
release, they choose another manufacturer and start over.
There is one notable exception to that cycle: Android 3.x/Honeycomb. In that specific
case, Google has not released the source code to the corresponding flagship product,
the Motorola Xoom, and all indications suggest that that code may never be publicly
available. The rationale in this case seems to be that the Android development team
essentially forked the Android code-base at some point in time in order to start working
on getting a tablet-ready version of Android out ASAP based on market timing prerog-
atives. Hence, in that version, very little regard was made to preserving backward com-
patibility with the phone form-factor. And given that, Google did not wish to make the
code available to avoid fragmentation of its platform. Instead, at the time of this writing,
6 | Chapter 1: Introduction

plans are that both the phone and tablet form factor support will be merged into the
upcoming Android 4.0/Ice-Cream Sandwich release.
Ecosystem
As of June 2011:
• 400,000 Android phones are activated each day, up from 300,000 in December
2010 and 200,000 in August of that same year.
• The Android Market contains arond 200,000 apps. In comparison, the Apple App
Store has 350,000 apps.
• More than a third of all phones sold in the US are based on Android.
Android is clearly on the upswing. In fact, Gartner predicted in April 2011 that Android
would hold about 50% of the smartphone market by 2015. Much as Linux disrupted
the embedded market about a decade ago, Android is poised to make its mark. Not
only will it flip the mobile market on its head, eliminating or sidelining even some of
the strongest players, but in the embedded space it is likely going to become the de-
facto standard UI for a vast majority of user-centric embedded devices.
An entire ecosystem is therefore rapidly building around Android. Silicon and system-
on-chip (SoC) manufacturers such as ARM, TI, Qualcomm, Freescale, NVidia and TI
have added Android support for their products, and handset and tablet manufacturers
such as Motorola, Samsung, HTC, Sony-Ericsson, LG, Archos, DELL, ASUS, etc. ship
an ever-increasing number of Android-equipped devices. This ecosystem also includes
an increasing number of diverse players, such as Amazon, Verizon, Sprint and
Barnes&Nobles, creating their own application markets.
Grass-roots communities and projects are also starting to sprout around Android, even
though it is developed behind closed doors. Some of those efforts follow in the footsteps
of phone modders, which essentially rely on hacking the binaries provided by the man-
ufacturers to create their own modifications or variants, while others have a more open
source tint to them, relying on the Android sources to create their own forks or addi-
tions. The xda-developers.com online forum, for instance, is traditionally frequented
by modders, while the cyanogenmod.com site hosts an Android fork which modifies
the Android sources to provide additional features and enhancements. Other Android
forks include Replicant (http://replicant.us), which aims at replacing as many of the
Android components with Free Software as possible, and MIUI (http://en.miui.com/),
which provides some cool UI hacks.
A Word on the Open Handset Alliance
As I mentioned earlier, the OHA was the initial vehicle through which Android was
first announced. It describes itself on its website as "... a group of 82 technology and
mobile companies who have come together to accelerate innovation in mobile and offer
Ecosystem | 7

consumers a richer, less expensive, and better mobile experience. Together we have
developed Android™, the first complete, open, and free mobile platform."
Beyond the initial announcement, however, it is unclear what role the OHA plays. For
example, an attendee at the "Fireside Chat with the Android Team" at Google I/O 2010
asked the panel what privileges were confered to him as a developer for belonging to a
company which is part of the OHA. After asking around the panel, the speaker essen-
tially answered that they didn't know because they aren't the OHA. Hence, it would
appear that OHA membership benefits are not clear to the Android development team
itself.
The role of the OHA is further blurred by the fact that it does not seem to be a full-time
organization with board members and permanent staff. Instead, it's just an "alliance."
In addition, there is no mention of the OHA within any of Google's Android an-
nouncements, nor do any new Android announcements emanate from the OHA. In
sum, one would be tempted to speculate that Google likely put the OHA together
mainly as a marketing front to show how much industry support there was for Android,
but that in practice it has little to no bearing on Android's development.
Getting "Android"
There are two main pieces required to get Android working on your embedded system:
an Android-compatible Linux kernel and the Android Platform.
As of this writing, you cannot use a "vanilla" kernel from kernel.org to run the Platform.
Instead, you need to either use one of the kernels available within the AOSP or patch
a "vanilla" kernel for it to be Android-compatible. Unfortunately, while a few attempts
have been made to merge the Android modifications into the mainline kernel, these
efforts haven't yet succeeded. It is expected that, in the long term, the pending issues
will be resolved and the mainline kernel will support Android "out of the box." For the
time being, however, we must contend with the fact Android-compatible kernels are
essentially forks of the mainline and will continue being so for the foreseable future.
The Android Platform is essentially a custom Linux distribution containing the user-
space packages which make up what is typically called "Android." The releases listed
in Table 1-1 are actually Platform releases. We will discuss the content and architecture
of the Platform in the next chapter. For the moment being, keep in mind that a Platform
release has a similar role to standard Linux distributions such as Ubuntu or Fedora. It's
a self-coherent set of software packages that, once built, provides a specific user expe-
rience with specific tools, interfaces, and developer APIs.
8 | Chapter 1: Introduction

While the proper term to identify the source code corresponding to the
Android distribution running on top of an Android-compatible kernel
is "Android Platform," it is commonly referred to as "the AOSP"—as is
the case in fact throughout this book—even though the Android Open
Source Project proper, which is hosted at http://android.git.kernel.org/,
contains a few more components in addition to the Platform, such as
sample Linux kernel trees and additional packages that would not typ-
ically be downloaded when the Platform is fetched using the usual
repo command.
Hacking Binaries
Lack of access to Android sources hasn't discouraged passionate modders from actually
hacking and customizing Android to their liking. For example, the fact that Android
3.x/Honeycomb isn't available hasn't precluded modders from getting it to run on the
Barnes&Noble Nook. They achieved this by retrieving the executable binaries found
in the emulator image provided as part of the Honeycomb SDK and used those as-is
on the Nook, albeit forfeiting hardware accelaration. The same type of hack has been
used to "root" or update versions of various Android components on actual devices for
which the manufacturer provides no source code.
Legal Framework
Like any other piece of software, Android's use and distribution is constricted by a set
of licenses, intellectual property restrictions, and market realities. Let's look at a few of
these.
Code Licenses
As we discussed earlier, there are two parts to "Android": an Android-compatible Linux
kernel and an AOSP release. Even though it is modified to run the AOSP, the Linux
kernel continues to be subject to the same GNU GPLv2 license that it has always been
under. As such, remember that you are not allowed to distribute any modifications you
make to the kernel under any other license than the GPL. Hence, if you take a kernel
version from android.git.kernel.org and modify it to make it run on your system, you
are allowed to distribute the resulting kernel image in your product only so long as you
abide by the GPL and, therefore, make the sources used to create the image, including
your modifications, available to recipients under the terms of the GPL.
The kernel also includes a notice by Linus Torvalds in its COPYING file in its sources
that clearly identifies that only the kernel is subject to the GPL and that applications
running on top of it are not considered "derived works." Hence, you are free to create
Legal Framework | 9

applications that run on top of the Linux kernel and distribute them under the license
of your choice.
These rules and their applicability are generally well understood and accepted within
open source circles and by most companies that opt to support the Linux kernel or use
it as the basis for their products. In addition to the kernel, a large number of key com-
ponents of Linux-based distributions are typically licensed under one form or another
of the GPL. The GNU C libary (glibc) and the GNU compiler (GCC), for example, are
licensed under the LGPL and the GPL respectively. Important packages commonly used
in embedded Linux systems such as uClibc and BusyBox are also licensed under the
LGPL and the GPL.
Not everyone is comfortable with the GNU GPL, however. Indeed, the restrictions it
imposes on the licensing of derived works can pose a serious challenge to large organ-
izations, especially given geographic distribution, cultural differences amongst the var-
ious locations of development sub-units, and the reliance on external subcontractors.
A manufacturer selling a product in North America, for example, might have to deal
with dozens, if not hundreds, of suppliers to get that product to the market. Each of
these suppliers might deliver a piece which may or may not contain GPL'd code. Yet
the manufacturer whose name appears on the item sold to the customer will be bound
to provide source to GPL components regardless of which supplier originated them. In
addition, processes must be put in place to ensure engineers that work on GPL-based
projects are abiding by the licenses.
When Google set out to work with manufacturers on their "open" phone OS, therefore,
it appears that very rapidly it became clear that the GPL had to be avoided in as much
as possible. In fact, other kernels than Linux were apparently considered, but Linux
was chosen because it already had strong industry support, particularly from ARM
silicon manufacturers, and because it was fairly well isolated from the rest of the system,
so that its GPL licensing would have little impact.§
It was decided, though, that every effort would be made to make sure that the vast
majority of user-space components would be based on licenses that did not pose the
same logistical issues as the GPL. That is why the vast majority of the components
created by Google for the AOSP are published under the Apache License 2.0 (a.k.a.
ASL) with some key components, such as the Bionic library and the Toolbox utility,
licensed under the BSD license. Some classic open source projects are also incorporated,
mostly as-is, into the AOSP within the external/ directory. The assumption is that their
distribution in binary form should not pose any problems since they aren't meant to be
typically customized by the OEM (i.e., no derived works are expected to be created)
and are readily available for all to download at android.git.kernel.org, thereby comply-
ing, if applicable, with the GPL's requirement that redistribution of derivative works
contibue being made under the GPL.
§See this LWN post by Brian Swetland, a member of Android's kernel development team, for more information
on the rationale behind these choices.
10 | Chapter 1: Introduction

Unlike the GPL, the ASL does not require that derivative works be published under a
specific license. In fact, you can choose whatever license best suits your needs for the
modifications you make. Here are the relevant portions from the ASL (the full license
is available at http://www.apache.org/licenses/):
• "Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, each Contributor hereby
grants to You a perpetual, worldwide, non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, ir-
revocable copyright license to reproduce, prepare Derivative Works of, publicly
display, publicly perform, sublicense, and distribute the Work and such Derivative
Works in Source or Object form."
• "... You may add Your own copyright statement to Your modifications and may
provide additional or different license terms and conditions for use, reproduction,
or distribution of Your modifications, or for any such Derivative Works as a whole,
provided Your use, reproduction, and distribution of the Work otherwise complies
with the conditions stated in this License."
Furthermore, the ASL explicitly provides a patent license grant, meaning that you do
not require any patent license from Google for using the ASL-licensed Android code.
It also imposes a few "administrative" requirements such as the need to clearly mark
modified files, to provide recipients with a copy of the ASL license, to preserve NO-
TICE files as-is, etc. Essentially, though, you are free to license your modifications under
the terms that fit your purpose. The BSD license that covers Bionic and Toolbox allows
similar binary-only distribution.
Hence, manufacturers can take the AOSP and customize it to their needs while keeping
those modifications proprietary if they wish, so long as they continue abiding by the
rest of the provisions of the ASL. If nothing else, this dimishes the burden of having to
implement a process to track all modifications in order to provide those modifications
back to recipients who would be entitled to request them had the GPL been used in-
stead.
Adding GPL-licensed components
Although every effort has been made to keep the GPL out of Android's user-space in
as much as possible, there are cases where you may want to explicitly add GPL-licensed
components to your Android distribution. For example, you want to include either
glibc of uClibc which are two POSIX-compliant C libraries—in contrast to Android's
Bionic which is not—because you would like to run pre-existing Linux applications on
Android without having to port them over to Bionic. Or you may want to use BusyBox
in addition to Toolbox since the latter is much more limited in functionality that the
former.
These additions may be specific to your development environment and may be removed
in the final product or they may be permanent fixtures or your own customized An-
droid. No matter which avenue you decide on, whether it be plain Android or Android
Legal Framework | 11

